# Mark Russell Babin
## May 21, 1995 - June 18th, 2022

For those who may not know me, I am Mark's oldest brother Kyle.  It is my great honor to have known, lived with, and loved Mark for his 27 years on this earth.  And it is now my great privilege to celebrate his life with a few words. <br><br>

Mark was a person with many spectacular gifts.  When I think of Mark, the first things that come to mind are natural talent, and a drive to excel. Three areas that best exemplify this are his passion for music, his determination, and his big heart. <br><br>

So first, we are going to talk about music.  When it comes to music, Mark was so gifted that I could write this speech entirely on the topic.  Mark's music journey began, of all places, with me fumbling through my weekly piano lesson practice.  One day, after my practice was done, Mom heard the chords from my song going again on the piano.  She came back into the room, but to her surprise, instead of me, she found 3 year old Mark on the bench.   It quickly became apparent which child needed to be in little kid piano lessons, when my Dad put 3 year old mark to the test.  He would play the opening notes of Mary had a little lamb, but intentionally mess up the 7th one.  Without hesitation, 3 year old Mark would interrupt, play the correct note on the piano, saying "No, dis one". <br><br>

Mark experienced music in a way that most people on this planet will never be able to.  That's because Mark, you see, was born with perfect, or absolute, pitch.  This is an innate ability to hear a single note and tell if it's an A or B-flat. The U.S. National Academy of Sciences notes: "This remarkable ability exists in a small fraction of the population and appears to be the result of an innate predisposition, combined with musical exposure and training, within a critical period during childhood".  For those less musically inclined, think of absolute pitch as the musical equivalent of looking at a blue wall, then going to a paint store and selecting the precise shade of blue from memory.   This natural gift, combined with his love and dedication to his practice, enabled Mark to become the amazing musician he was throughout his entire life. <br><br>

And Mark's piano lessons were only the beginning.  Mark excelled in the elementary school band right here at St. Jude, learning a lot under band director Doc Andry.  Him and my brother Daniel played in the St. Jude Jazz band, performing at competitions, like at Loyola University in 2007. Mark had occasionally even joined my dad to play music for mass right here in St. Jude church.  Following in the footsteps of their father, Mark and Daniel formed an elementary school Rock Band, the likes of which has never been seen, and they called themselves "Caught in the Crossfire".  This is where Mark began to perfect his other instrument, his beloved drum kit.  Mark carried his love of drums with him throughout the rest of his life, playing snare drum in Catholic's marching band, and also playing in the drumline of the Golden Band from Tigerland.  He even formed a rock band after college, which has a published record you can listen to on Spotify.  No seriously, Google "Mark Babin drummer" and you will find it.  The band titled One-Trick Pony recorded the album in the music room of our parents house, much to my mom's chagrin at the time.  You can hear Mark's drums in every song on the record, although Daniel has a vision to remaster it to make those drums shine even brighter.  Most recently in life, Mark loved traveling to concerts and music festivals to see the best jam bands that you have never heard of.  Signed set-lists from concerts, as well as pictures with the bands, were among his prized possessions. <br><br>

Mark was very giving with his musical talents, and was always happy to play piano at family gatherings, be it classics or crowd pleasers.  He loved learning difficult pieces, and could play some famous ones from Beethoven, Chopin, and Mozart.  However, he was just as happy to play jazzed up jingle bells for Christmas at my parents or grandparents house while the family was gathered to celebrate.  My personal favorite: his renditions of Vince Guaraldi's 'A Charlie Brown Christmas'.  <br><br>

When I think of Mark's determination, the first story I can remember was when Mark was 2 years old.  At the time, we were living in California for my dad's work and had many trips to the airport.  On one return flight back to San Francisco, our departure out of Louisiana was delayed, and we were stuck at the airport with my grandparents.  While my dad worked on a plan to rearrange the flights, my mom worked on a plan to watch over 3 young boys, leaving my grandpa in charge of Mark.  Now Mark loved to wander, so in his fascination, my grandpa crafted an experiment.  He let Mark wander, walking a safe distance right behind him, to see just how far Mark would go before returning to my parents.  To my grandpa's surprise, Mark kept going, and going, and going, until my grandpa had to snatch him, a dozen gates away, when Mark tried to walk through the doors exiting the departure terminal.  Mark's determination to boldly go, and to achieve, stayed with him throughout his life.  <br><br>

Mark's brilliant mind was apparent at a young age, and he chose to join Catholic High School for 8th grade in the fall of 2008.  He took every honor's class he could fit in, and loved competing in, and winning, Louisiana State competitions in Math and Latin.  It was also during his time in high school that he pressed forward with achieving the rank of Eagle Scout, following in my grandpa's footsteps.  As many of you know, he finished high school as the valedictorian of the class of 2013.  What some of you may not know, is that he learned what a valedictorian was 5 years prior at my own graduation.  As my grandpa recalls, he was sitting in the River Center as a 7th grader in May of 2008, when he asked my grandpa why this one kid was giving a speech.  My grandpa explained "well that's just the way it is, whoever has the highest GPA is called the valedictorian and gets to give a speech".  Mark replied with "Oh, I'm gonna do that".  There was simply no stopping Mark when he put his mind to a task. <br><br>

Mark went on to graduate college in Electrical Engineering at LSU, and excelled at progressively more complex jobs at ISC, Jacobs, and then Emerson.  Mark planned for the long term, and was judicious in his investments and work retirement savings, with his one splurge being his Grey BMW 430i coupe, which he cherished.  In the office, Mark was respected by his coworkers and recognized by his supervisors.  He took assignments and projects of increasing responsibility, including an opportunity to work in Pittsburgh at the brand new site being built at the Pennsylvania chemicals project. <br><br>

Mark's amazing intellect and drive to excel was not limited to his school and work.  Mark was a wiz at whatever puzzle or game you put in front of him, and his memory was uncanny.  Growing up, our favorite movie was school of rock, and I will forever miss being able to recite line after line of movie quotes with him, as we could finish each other's sentences, both having the entire script essentially memorized.   A more practical application of his amazing memory: His ability to recite the ridiculous 16 character default wifi password that my dad never changed.  For anyone interested in connecting next time you are at my parents house, the Password is:  znvnm5w8h2lj3zcp. Good Luck. <br><br>

When talking about Mark's determination and drive to excel, I would be remiss to not mention his love of video games.  Growing up in a house with 3 brothers, things got pretty deep, and pretty competitive.  From Mario Kart to Zelda, Pokemon, super smash bros and Halo, Mark enjoyed and excelled at them all, including many fond memories of playing the N64 at my grandma's house with all of our cousins. <br><br>

My earliest personal memory of Mark is a funny example of his video game determination on display.  Allow me to take you back to a simpler time, the year was 1998, and I was in 3rd grade.  At that time, there was only one thing that mattered in the entire world.....and that of course, was Pokemon. As a 3 year old, not only would Mark help me sort and sleeve Pokémon cards, but he was fascinated by the lime green GameBoy color and copy of Pokemon Yellow I had recently gotten for Christmas.  After I had beaten the game, I still desired to level my team up to 100, which was a very slow grind.   I don't remember how I convinced my mom of this, or honestly if she even knew, but Mark and I crafted a plan.  You see, the main bottleneck in the race to level 100 was time, and progress was slow since I had to go to school every day.  So I explained to 3 year old Mark the steps needed to grind toward the goal, and I was stunned at how fast and accurately he picked it up.  To this day, I vividly remember coming home from school the first day of our plan, and 3 year old Mark had a full report out for me.  "Kyle, I got Charizard up to level 84, etc, etc" <br><br>

Mark's love of games wasn't purely virtual, he was also quite gifted athletically.  While sports could never replace music as his primary passion, he loved running, going to the gym, and all things Frisbee.  Some of my favorite memories with Mark will forever be our rounds of Frisbee golf at Highland road park, and our games of Kan-Jam at the beach with our Fontenot cousins.  Mark was even on the Catholic High ultimate Frisbee team for 1 season,  quite a difficult juggle given his band commitments.  He was also at home on any type of board, either skateboarding in elementary school, skim-boarding at the beach each summer, or snowboarding in the Rockies. <br><br>

When it comes to Mark's big heart, I'll start with a cliche, and a story to go with it.  Mark would give a needy person the shirt right off his back.  And I mean literally.  I recall our 2015 family summer vacation in Estes Park Colorado, when Daniel took us on one of his wild hike and climb adventures.  Our expedition somehow led us to needing to cross a shin high creek using a guide wire, and my poor wife Sydney accidentally slipped and fell in, soaking her clothes.  Fortunately Mark was already on the other shore, and without hesitation, he immediately took off most of his layers, so that he could give them to her to dry off.  Everyone else followed suit, and fortunately we escaped that hike with nothing worse than my mom's scolding of Daniel's route selection.  In this example, and many more, Mark's love of family is evident.  While this was most frequently visible in his interactions with my mother and our several family cats, he cared deeply for all of his extended family.  Alongside his love of family, was his love of tradition, including our regular trips to Ville Platte, to visit grandma and grandpa.  Whether it was our annual Easter egg pocking contest, opening weekend of hunting season, or our family Christmas gatherings with the Babin's or the Fontenot's, if it was tradition, Mark was there.  His love of tradition also grounded his strong beliefs on matters of society, country, and God, and he sought out and always enjoyed good conversation on these topics.  <br><br>

Whether you talked to his family, his band mates, or his coworkers, the message was always the same.  Mark was a kind, logical, and thoughtful guy who was a reliable friend.  Monday June 13th is the last day I spoke to Mark, and we had a lovely chat.  He talked about what to get dad for Father's day.  He always put a lot of thought into gift giving.  Him and I talked about arranging a trip for me to visit him in Pittsburgh, my small return trip following the 2 weeks he visited Sydney and I in Qatar, back in 2019.  After checking the home schedule for the Pittsburgh Pirates, we had agreed to the weekend of July 30th, as Mark was off that weekend.  The final thing we talked about was how excited he was to come back into town Thursday.  He was looking forward to our cousin's wedding, to seeing his Nephew Bennett, and to our annual Fontenot family beach vacation.  This conversation may seem odd given the circumstances we find ourselves in today, but it was confirmed when we were sorting his affairs last week in Pittsburgh.  Mark's car had a fully packed suitcase ready to go back home to Louisiana.  Poor Mark loved his family so very much.  However, we also must recognize that Mark suffered greatly.  <br><br>

Sadly, Mark began to show signs of mental illness during his freshman year of college.  No diagnosis ever fit him clearly, as he was still able to complete his difficult college curriculum and hold a job, but he suffered severe insomnia, depression and anxiety, loneliness, and bouts of paranoia.  Tragically, this combination of factors often leads to pain so unbearable that a person takes their own life.  While we will never know exactly what thoughts or conditions catalyzed the terrible night when Mark passed from this world, make no mistake about why we are gathered here today.  Mark suffered for 9 years with a disease, and that is what provided the backdrop within which the figurative "mental car crash" that claimed his life was possible. <br><br>

I want to close with, more than anything, a giant thank you and acknowledgement to my amazing parents.  There were many difficult times in Mark's final 9 years with us, and this saga has taken an unimaginable toll on them.  But they rose to every situation in a most selfless and admirable fashion, in a way that many parents could only dream of.  I am convinced that if not for the love and dedication of many gathered here, but most particularly that of my parents, this funeral Mass very well could have been 7, 8, or even 9 years ago.  I am forever grateful for the countless sacrifices my parents made so that Mark was able to live the life that he did.  So as we go forward with the rest of our lives without Mark, a few final points. 1. Keep Mark's spirit alive.  If you find yourself in a situation where you are reminded of Mark's life, do not suppress such a memory.  Instead, honor him by talking about him.  This is a direct request from my parents and family.  2. Don't underestimate the impact that reaching out can have on people's lives.  If someone you know is either lonely or hurting, a few words can make a big difference.  I know they did for Mark.  3. Remember that burying your child is the hardest thing most people could ever have to do.  So as the weeks turn to months, and the months turn to years, know that for many, this grief will remain, in various ways and stages.  So I request the continuation of your prayers, presence, and support as my family moves forward, learning how to live our lives without our sweet youngest brother. <br><br>

Mark, we will miss you dearly. 
